Wine Storage

General Information
Proper storage conditions are essential to optimize the longevity and potential pleasure of cellared wines. There are three factors crucial to assuring that wine has not lost its potential of delivering an enjoyable experience when finally opened and served.

Light Protection
Bottles need to be protected from sunlight and florescent light sources that may damage wine.

Store in Still Conditions
Wine bottles need to be stored in still conditions. Frequent movement will put undue pressure on the seal that keeps the wine securely in its bottle and free from leakage or the intrusion of air (whether cork, composite material or plastic). A faulty seal can cause the wine to oxidize and be spoiled by the time you drink it.

Bottles Need to be Stored at a Constant Temperature
Wine bottles need to be stored at as close to a constant temperature as possible. The conventional temperature generally agreed upon is 54˚ fahrenheit (roughly 12.7˚ celsius). Storing wine above this temperature will accelerate the wine’s aging and cause a coarsening of its texture. Storing wine below this temperature will slow its aging and suspend it in something approximating a time warp. Storing wine in the shifting but generally warm temperatures of an apartment, a living room or in open shelves in a restaurant will end up reducing white wines into a beverage that tastes like “cooking sherry” and will diminish the richness and brightness of red wines and make them seem tired.


Wine Service

Presentation of Wine in a Restaurant
When a server or Sommelier presents the label of a bottle in a restaurant, it is simply to confirm it is the bottle that was ordered. When followed by a taste of the wine it is a last minute check to assure the wine doesn’t show spoilage through mishandling in shipping and storage or carries a taint as the result of a bad cork or bad seal on the bottle.

When Should a Customer Reject a Wine?
There are only two legitimate reasons for rejecting a wine in a restaurant. First, it is not the wine you ordered (which should be determined before the wine is opened). And, second, the wine smells spoiled, tainted or corked.

Serving Temperature for Wine
White wine is traditionally served cold to enhance its crisp, mouth-refreshing qualities. Red wine is traditionally served at a cool ‘cellar’ temperature. Since you can't keep a wine from warming to room temperature after it is poured, it is best the wine is served in small amounts. Adding small amounts of wine to your glass will keep the taste fresh. 

Can I Take My Own Bottle into a Restaurant?
This is a privilege offered by many restaurants. It is never a ‘right’ and in some cases is prohibited by law. If it is your intention to bring a bottle from your cellar, always check with the restaurant as to their policy and expect a service (handling) fee to be charged by the restaurant.

Can I Take the Remains of an Unfinished Bottled with me from the Restaurant?
This is determined by local laws but, if you are allowed to take the remainder with you, always have the restaurant recork or reseal the bottle and, if leaving by vehicle, place the bottle well out of reach of the driver. A DUI citation gives a fine dinner a bitter finish.

The Pricing of Wine in a Restaurant?
The price of wines in restaurants varies markedly throughout the World. Typically, a restaurant in the United States will price wine at twice or three times (even more for rare and aged wines) what you might pay for the same wine, if available at retail. This is intended to cover the cost of purchasing, storage, wine service and purchasing errors. However, many restaurants find their customers enjoy their restaurant experience more when the food is matched with an enjoyable bottle of wine. These restaurants enhance their competitive edge by offering wines at prices approaching retail.

How Long does a Wine Remain ‘Good’ after it is opened?
A wine will improve immediately after it is opened and first encounters oxygen, then it will begin a slow decline. However, if it is resealed after dinner and then stored under cool conditions, a bottle of wine may continue to be enjoyable for as much as a week after it is first opened. There are two commercially available aids to enhance preserving wine in a bottle after it has been opened. Artificial corks and simple pumps are available to help pump the air out of a partially empty bottle and there are aerosol cans that will displace the air that has flooded into the bottles with a protective gas before it is resealed.

Is There a ‘Proper’ Wine Glass?
Wine can be enjoyed swigging it from a shared bottle but is most enjoyable when served in a “glass”. Plastic glasses can make great sense when served by a pool (or in places where people are likely to be walking about barefooted) but plastic can take away from your appreciation of the quality of the aromas and flavors. The best glasses are designed to curve inward at the top rim for this helps to hold the wine within the glass when swirled to release its esters and also helps to hold the aromas within the glass. The rest is simply a matter of presentation.


Wine Tasting: The WineDefined Tasting Method

General Information
The following is the <i>long version</i> of describing what you are recording when you write a tasting note, but it explains a bit about what you are doing in writing a note and offers guidelines as to the relative amount of time each step merits. Actually, the following text will likely take you far longer to read than the amount of time you will need to taste, write and store a wine note in the WineDefined cloud. Yet, rest assured, after recording a few tasting notes the method will seem intuitive, quick and will save a whole lot of memory lapses. And, won’t it feel good to know you are a light year or two beyond most of the people who talk about wine.\n\nNo matter how mysterious and complex wine tasting may seem, the procedure simply breaks down to five steps. The process is: (1) a quick observation of the <b>Appearance</b>; (2) defining the wine’s <b>Aromas & Flavors</b>; (3) evaluating the <b>Mouthfeel</b>; and, (4) noting the <b>Finish & Aftertaste</b> of the <i>wine</i>; plus (5) rendering your <b>Evaluation</b> as to the appeal of the total package. The rest is simply developing your memory to differentiate between the uniqueness of one wine versus another (and our <b>Reference</b> content pieces will help on that). Including the time for noting the identify of the wine being tasted and taking a photo of the label, the entire process of writing a minimally credible note to save to the “cloud” should not take more than a couple of minutes. The WineDefined format saves time by providing a choice of starting sentences for each of the five steps and the text of the note can be edited at any time by your adding appropriate words or deleting the words you find unnecessary or irrelevant. Your recall of a wine does not depend on the number of words you include in a note but it does depend on your selection of words. Your finished note will then be available for almost instant recall from the cloud and opportunity to do further editing is always available.

Appearance
Is the wine clear, bright and appealing in appearance? This is the intention of every winemaker. If the wine fails to meet these standards, something went wrong in the winemaking or storage process. The result is that the wine is not likely to taste any better than it is to view. <i>[This is the first and simplest step of Wine Tasting and should take only the briefest moment of time.]</i>

Aromas & Flavors
Judgements on aromas and flavors are determined by your sense of smell. We simply call the esters that you breathe in through your nose the aromas of the wine and the esters released through warming wine in your mouth as its flavors. <i>Aromas</i> and flavors are imprinted on your memory throughout your experience beginning in early childhood but to communicate with others you will likely affix to the sensations the words that are conventionally used in describing wine. The TYPES section identifies many of these conventions. <i>[This is a sensory question and your unique experiences come into play in personalizing the tasting note, i.e. does the wine remind you of the smell of a horse’s wet saddle blanket, the sweetly pungent notes of wild chamomile or have you found the perfumed scents of berries or of ripe cherries?]</i>

Mouthfeel (Balance)
There are five different parts to the mouthfeel of a wine. It includes the impact from alcohol; the impression from acidity; the residual sugar or sweetness perceived; any astringency encountered; and, the wine’s resulting texture. [If the wine seems in perfect balance this determination is quick and easy and your impression can be almost instantly noted for future recall — if not, simply note the wine’s shortcomings SO THAT THE NOTE MAKES SENSE when you recall the note to share it with friends or publish it.]\n\n<b>(1) Alcohol:</b> Every wine, by its very definition, contains alcohol, an element absolutely critical to wine remaining stable in storage. Wines in the range of 7-11% are intended to be ‘light’ and refreshing but cannot be expected to store well for more than a year or two. Wines ranging from 12-15% are in the range of table wines and intended for enjoyment with food. Wines with more than 16% alcohol, such as Ports and Sherries, are usually produced by adding distilled spirits to the blend to stop fermentation and are very stable, long-lived wines that have been known to stay appealing for more than one hundred years. An unbalanced overly alcoholic wine may seem hot or burning on the palate. Some of the words that have gained meaning in professional writing include: Body (a word related to the density or viscosity of wine and often expressed in wine writing as fullness, such as full bodied or light bodied. It is the viscosity and density of alcohol, combined with dissolved solids, that give wine its big impression in the mouth, and not glycerol. A wine might be described as heavy when it contains too much alcohol and extracts and hot when containing too much alcohol.\n\n<b>(2) Acidity:</b> All wines have acidity and all refreshing drinks owe their appeal to the balance between their acidic qualities and their bitter and sweet components. Table grapes are very subtle and therefore have very little acidity but acidity is a critical component of a winegrape. It is the acidity that brings forward the flavor, preserves the color, gives the crisp impression and its balance is a major factor regarding how well the wine will complement various kinds of food. An overly tart wine is over the edge and may be described as shrill. The unpleasant qualities can be the result of its grapes being underripe.\n\n<b>(3) Sugar:</b> Wine is made through the conversion of sugar into alcohol and every finished wine contains the range between a tiny degree or a generous quantity of residual sugar. The latter are dessert wines (a category of wine known to age very well and some are famous for their improvement during aging). There are only a few rare wines that have measurable sugar under 0.5%. However, few tasters are good at detecting levels of sweetness below 1.2% and wines below the threshold of 1.4% are categorized as “dry”. A wine can range between being too austere or far too sweet.\n\n<b>(4) Astringency:</b> All red wines contain tannic astringency because their red color comes from the skins. White wines may also show tannic astringency because tannin is also sourced from grape seeds, but this affect from seeds is not usually a significant factor in either white or red wines. Tannins can cause significant astringency in the wine, is a preserving agent and will usually be present in red wines expected to improve with careful cellaring. A wine might be described as hard when too much tannin and too little impression of fruit is present and soft when low in tannin. Tannins will usually soften by the time a wine has reached its peak.\n\n<b>(5) Texture</b>: The texture of wines can range from thin and shrill, as in low alcohol and overly acidic white wines, or be experienced as round, full and opulent, as you would find in a big, complex red wine, owing to an abundance of soft tannins in balance with all the other components. These factors each have an affect on how well a particular wine serves with various foods. Smooth or velvety are other imprecise terms for pleasing texture.

Finish & Aftertaste
There are two parts of this fourth step in tasting. The Finish is the final mouthfeel impression left on your palate and determines much of your impression of balance and length. Aftertaste is what lingers in your mouth after the wine is swallowed (or doesn’t linger when the wine finishes short). The combination has an impact on the satisfaction you may derive from a particular wine and your judgement as to its appeal and ‘quality’. [In most wines this judgement takes but a brief moment.] 

Evalutation
The “Evaluation” you need to make is simply based on how well you like the wine and your assessment of the satisfactory service it might render when served in specific social situations or with particular foods. As you quickly develop your facility with this format, you will gain the ability to reach sustainable judgements, professionally credable in very brief time - and with very minimum intake of alcohol.  [Unless you are writing ‘ad copy designed to help market a particular wine, the main question is do you like the wine, find it recommendable or not and whether it is or is not the perfect match for something you enjoy eating.]

Final Note
WineDefined Tasting Notes are designed to help you work quickly and easily and to capture the essence of the wine in a format that is readable and recaptures the impressions you had when first tasting the wine. Almost equally important they are savable notes that can be recorded when the wine is fresh in your memory and editable as other thoughts and insights come into your awareness. They are designed to be the quintessential 2 Minute tasting note. Write your note quickly then RE-READ and EDIT the notes before you save them to the cloud. In editing eliminate inappropriate words and be sure to ADD personal impressions that recall and recapture your original impressions.